# Acute and Chronic Pain 

Thomas Horton, Soibhan Kelley

---

- There are physiological AND emotional components to pain.
    Biopsychosocial factors must be addressed. Ex: anxiety/depression,
    physical debility, and poor social support. Many pts will never be
    completely free of pain, so it is important to set realistic
    expectations

- Central sensitization is a phenomenon where the nervous system
    persists in a state of high reactivity which lowers the threshold
    for pain stimuli. Two characteristics of centralized pain are
    allodynia (pain from non-painful stimuli) and hyperalgesia (painful
    stimuli perceived as more painful)

## Pharmacologic Therapy

Acetaminophen: 650mg q6hr or 1g q8h. \<3g/day. (\<2g in liver patients)

- Avoid if you are worried about masking fevers

NSAIDs: A great option for acute pain, especially musculoskeletal, HA,
and nephrolithiasis in eligible patients (ex: IV/po ketorolac,
ibuprofen, naproxen, etc.)

- Avoid in acute or chronic kidney disease and ↑ risk of bleeding.
    Caution in CAD/PVD

Topical Analgesics: Best for localized pain but utilized frequently as
part of a multimodal regimen

- Lidocaine ointment, patches (PADR needed at VA for patches. Can get
    by saying contraindication to TCA/gabapentinoids/SNRIs due to
    sedation risk)

- Menthol salicylate gel

- Diclofenac Gel

- Capsaicin gel

- Morphine gel (typically limited to oncology patients with tumor
    breakdown through skin)

Neuropathic Agents: Best for neuropathic pain but can be tried for other
chronic pain or as part of acute pain regimen. SNRIs and TCAs can
provide additional benefit if a pt has comorbid depression, anxiety, or
insomnia (TCA). Most agents take 6-8 weeks for peak effect.

- Gabapentin (Initial: 100 to 300 mg 1 to 3 times daily). Can be used
    for acute pain

- Pregabalin (Initial: 25 to 150 mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses). Has
    better bioavailability. May work in patients who did not tolerate or
    did not have success with gabapentin

- Duloxetine (Initial: 30 mg daily for 1 to 2 weeks, then increase to
    60 mg daily as tolerated)

- Amitriptyline (Initial: 10 to 25 mg once daily at bedtime)

Muscle Relaxants: Should be used temporarily and intermittently but some
benefit from longer term use. Great for paraplegia, spinal injury,
spasticity.

- Methocarbamol (Initial: 1.5 g 3 to 4 times daily for 2 to 3 days
    then decrease dose to ≤4.5 g/day in 3 to 4 divided doses). Preferred
    initial agent as has least SE.

- Tizanidine (Initial: 2 to 4 mg every 6 to 12 hours as needed and/or
    at bedtime) – important to watch out for withdrawal in patients that
    take frequently at home.

- Cyclobenzaprine (Initial: 5 to 10 mg once daily before bedtime)

- Metaxalone (Oral: 800 mg 3 to 4 times daily)

Opioids: Frequently used in hospital for acute pain. Limit use as much
as possible in chronic pain as contributes to long-term central
sensitization. May benefit some patient populations but should always be
used as a component of a comprehensive, multimodal, patient-specific
treatment plan.

- Refer to section under Opioids: General Principles & Conversions for
    OME equivalents

    - If \>80 OME per day, ensure patient is prescribed naloxone

    - If \>120 OME per day, refer to pain clinic

- Common choices for acute pain in hospital (always start at low end
    for opioid naïve):

    - Oxycodone (PO) 5-10mg q4 to 6 hours prn

    - Hydromorphone (IV) 0.25 to 1mg q2 to 3 hours prn

- For pts on opioids at home, should always continue in hospital to
    avoid withdrawal unless clinically contraindicated. Can always
    titrate dose as needed

- Tramadol: Has opioid & NSAID properties. Of note, tramadol also
    inhibits serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake. Metabolized by
    CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 so there is variability between patients. Typical
    dose: 25 to 50mg q4 to 6 hours prn

NMDA Antagonists: Usually prescribed by our pain management colleagues
but worthwhile to think about as a potential option if a patient’s pain
continues to be difficult to control.

- Ketamine (IV infusion). SE includes AMS/delirium, hallucinations,
    and dissociation.

- Memantine (PO)

Alpha 2 agonists (central pain): Not commonly utilized in everyday
practice, but helpful in certain patients with chronic pain (off-label).
Guanfacine vs clonidine

## Non-pharmacologic therapies

Procedural Intervention: Best utilized when there is a specific,
targetable

- Referral to chronic/interventional pain management (Nerve blocks or
    Radio-ablative therapy)

Adjunct Therapies: Patient’s will have varying opinions and responses on
adjunctive therapies, but these can be as important as any pharmacologic
therapy. CBT, personalized exercise regimen, PT/OT, chiropractor,
acupuncture

## Additional Resources for Residents

- Pain Management Center at VUMC

- Pain Clinic at the VA. Would specify whether or not you are OK with
    them initiating opioids.

- Complementary and Integrative Health consult at VA

- Osher Center for Integrative Health at Vanderbilt

## Acute pain for special populations

Renal dysfunction: Check that meds are renally dosed and start with
non-sedating options. Always avoid NSAIDs, morphine and codeine.

- Acetaminophen and topicals

- Opioids: oxycodone 2.5 to 5 mg, IV hydromorphone 0.25-0.5mg,
    fentanyl IV 25 to 50mcg

- Gabapentin: start with spot 100mg. Be extremely careful with quick
    up titration in CKD due to sedation risk.

- Methocarbamol: no specific renal dosing, try 500-750mg initially

Cirrhosis: Always avoid NSAIDs, morphine, codeine, hydromorphone (may be
OK in mild to moderate cirrhosis)

- Acetaminophen (2g max/d) & topicals are safe

- Gabapentin: start with spot 100mg

- Methocarbamol: no specific hepatic dosing, try 500 mg initially

- Other options: consider tramadol 25-50 mg vs oxycodone 2.5 mg

History of substance use disorder: Overnight, always review handoff as
day team likely has specific plan in place.

- With substance use history, typically rely on multimodal agents as
    above. Patients who are in recovery may prefer to avoid opioids
    themselves

- However, patients with OUD can and do have acute, severe pain due to
    injury, infections, procedures, etc. NEVER withhold opiates if
    clinically appropriate, regardless of substance use history
